Okay, tuck in a check.
Okay.
It's there.
I'll forget it's there in a minute or two.
But my sister lives in the apartment upstairs, and she works out in Attleboro.
So I get down here this morning.
I brave the weather.
Get down here this morning.
She comes down and says, I'm stuck in the middle of the road.
So I spend the first hour of the day shoveling her out.
Now, you're a disability business?
Yeah.
And a disability insurance business?
Yeah, my father started the business the year I was born, I guess, 59.
And... Tell me what the math makes you, what?
36.
Just turned 36 on Christmas Day.
And I came in here.
Christmas Day is your birthday?
Yeah.
Obviously.
Christmas, baby.
I was the 24th.
Oh, yeah?
Just missed it.
Oh, boy.
So you get to put them in the morning.
Yeah.
Knock wood.
We'll take it.
Yeah.
You're a Worcester guy, obviously.
Absolutely, yeah.
This is part of the story, I guess.
You basically spent your whole life here, is that right?
I haven't gotten out.
Not only a Worcester guy, but the shame of it, Mick, is that I was born and grew up on June Street, less than a half a mile from here.
What's the name of that neighborhood?
Newton Square area is usually what I say when I'm trying to direct someone there.
But...
Born on June Street and lived there for 21 years.
Went to school right here at Blessed Sacrament at the corner of Park and Pleasant.
Then I went for four years and went up to Holy Cross, which was the farthest I've ever gone, really, for the most part.
Of course, that's the great goal of every... Yeah, really, right?
I didn't go far, that's for sure.
So that's probably a mile from where you were born.
Yeah, exactly.
And then... Did you always want to go to Holy Cross?
I mean, were you tempted to maybe try Boston College and really explore?
You know what?
I never, you know, I wasn't, I was not, by any stretch of the imagination, a voracious academic, you know?
I wasn't, until, you know, my parents put the gun to my head my senior year in high school and said, hey, you've got to go to school somewhere.
And the reality of, you know, the only jobs I'd had till then was I was always a dishwasher at a restaurant, you know.
So the idea was, you know, well, geez, if I don't go to some school, I'm going to be washing dishes somewhere.
So I end up at Holy Cross for four years.
And then when I got married, I got married a year after I got out of school.
My wife and I moved over to Longfellow Road, which is about two blocks from here.
So I always say for 36 years, my whole life's been circumscribed in about a two-mile
square area you know when did you graduate holy cross i got out of uh holy cross in 81 yeah and your wife so what's the girl she's from lowell actually i'm from lowell are you really oh my god you probably know all the same people well what's your what's your name well her maiden name was nancy murphy yeah and uh don't forget i graduated lowell high school in 61 so i've been
Jeez.
Out of there.
Well, as you can see from the poster behind you, you can see the Lowell connection.
There you go, right?
I didn't realize that it was that, you know, that... That was our meeting point.
I was a, you know, as a teenager, I was a big Kerouac fanatic.
No kidding.
And so I met Nance, like, the first week, you know, we were in college.
She went to Holy Cross?
She went to Holy Cross from Lowell.
And we got to talking, you know, one of the first things she says is, I'm from Lowell, you know.
Oh, my God, Jack Kerouac was from Lowell.
And she says, you know, very proudly, she says, oh, his grave is across the street from my parents' house.
Her parents bought a cemetery, you know.
So I said, you met him?
Oh, of course.
You know, when wasn't he?
Of course.
But, oh, my God, you could lay claim to.
Once you told him you were from Lowell, you must have been golden with him.
Or it didn't connect at all.
He was mooching.
I mean, it was really kind of sad.
It was really sad.
But anyway.
Those last years and all the biographies.
Not a memorable encounter.
No, not one to write about.
But anyway, go ahead.
I like these freewheeling things, though.
That was how we met.
That was the initiating point of our first conversation.
We stayed up all night long talking about Kerouac.
Were you a literature major?
Yeah, I was an English major.
You know, I thought, the whole thing for me was that, you know, I was just a born reader.
I was just, there were a lot of books in our house.
You know, I grew up in a big two-and-a-half family, you know, and extended family lived with us, you know.
I thought it was the three-decker.
Close to it.
It wasn't the full third floor, you know.
I'm thinking of a story that I can fashion for outside the region, too, you know.
You can call it a three-decker.
It's a full three levels, but the top floor isn't a full apartment.
But, you know, my grandparents and I lived on the first floor, and we lived on the top two floors.
And in the top floor, you know, there were five of us, five kids.
And so the top floor, my parents just sort of made a big, you know, loft area to get us out of the hair.
And what my father did was he took one end of the room and he just made, you know, all bookshelves.
And then they took, you know, a lifetime's worth of all my grandparents' books and my aunt's books, my mother's books, my father's books.
Well, they had books, but they were all, you know, everything from, you know, chemistry texts from 1930 to... Did your parents go to school?
Did your father go to college?
My father went to Holy Cross.
My mother was... Second generation?
You might even be... Third, actually.
My grandfather went also.
Yeah, yeah.
My grandfather was class of 13.
So your grandfather was class of 13.
Yeah.
But they weren't, you know, it's funny.
They were all... My father was class of what?
My father was class of 50.
And I was... Is he Jim?
He was Jim.
And your grandfather was who?
My grandfather was my namesake, actually.
He was John.
Yeah, yeah.
Jack.
Both of us were Jack.
But the funny thing was, and extending down to me, you know, I say, I mean, people sort of sneer at it, but they were still all, you know, working class Irish.
We all ended up at Holy Cross kind of by accident, you know?
I don't believe it.
I know.
And everybody says that, and yet...
My grandfather, he got out of Holy Cross, and what does he do?
He becomes a 30-year registry cop.
You know, he never went on, never did anything with a degree.
And my father, you know, it was an accident of the G.I.
Bill, basically.
He grew up on Oread Street, you know.
He was destined for God knows what.
Well, he didn't just go because he had the GI Bill.
I mean, he clearly was motivated to go to college.
Well, I think it was the milieu.
He came back.
He was in the Navy for four years.
He came back from the war, and all his contemporaries, all his peers were taking advantage of it.
They were all going back to school, so he went down.
The red light is on, right?
The red light is on.
Is it on?
There's a little red light, yeah.
And, yeah, it's fine.
Is it working?
Yeah, it's fine.
And the little thing is twirling, right?
It's moving.
With sake.
I mean, I just have to... Have you ever had an incident where you end up with a blank tape?
No, never with a blank tape, but I have had a tape that's going down function on there.
I usually carry two tape refers.
I do, too, and I, you know, this is a nice one.
I keep one in the car, you know, and I just put notes down.
I always tell them.
Anyway, let's go back.
Get off the tape recorder.
So I grew up in a big, you know, three-decker full of these books.
And my mother was a real, she was the real reader.
My mother would just, you know, she was a, she loved books from childhood.
And she became a registered nurse, and she always seemed to work night shifts.
And so she always would say, you know, I always had a flashlight, you know, where she'd be doing private duty, you know.
Fiction, obviously.
Yeah, fiction.
Yeah, she'd read anything, you know.
She was just voracious.
And I got it from her, you know, I swear.
And I just grew up, you know, my world was books, you know.
And yet, you know, going to parochial schools, there wasn't a tremendous amount of, you know, discipline was the key word more than math.
stoking the imagination you know memorize the baltimore catechism more than you know enjoy shakespeare so my so that you know i wasn't really steered in any direction my my uh reading aesthetic was formed by what was ever in the uh black wire spin racks at the local rexall you know literally that we had a rexall on the corner of june street the corner of june street and chandler and that you know i we always had jobs and chores you know growing up and whenever i'd save
You know, at the time it was like, it had moved up from 60 cents to 75 cents for a paperback.
And I'd go down and I'd, you know... Always fiction, always novels?
Always, almost always novels.
Occasionally writers' biographies, you know.
I remember reading Jack London's biography, you know, at a young age.
How big, how large is your family?
How many kids?
Five kids.
I'm the middle kid.
Two older sisters, younger brother, younger sister.
And...
on the heels of becoming a real reader.
And they always seemed naturally meshed to me.
I just started scribbling in notebooks.
I mean, did you always know that you were coming into the family business?
Not at all.
Everything's been so haphazard.
I had the kind of gall that only a tremendously unaware young person can have that, you know,
I'd just keep filling notebooks up, and eventually I'd, you know, I'd end up a writer somehow, sooner or later, you know.
And I could never, it was really, about once a year every fall I teach this high school writing program, you know, high school kids around, actually from now it's from all over New England.
And I always say, you know, these kids seem so much more sophisticated than I ever was.
You know, at that age, it's just, my idea literally was if I could ever meet
you know, a living, breathing, real writer, you know.
And I had 15 minutes to ask them the top 10 questions.
I had the questions framed out in my mind.
The questions, and they were the most literal, meat-fisted questions.
They were, you know, do you write with a typewriter or a pencil?
You know, if it's a typewriter, is it a Smith-Corona?
If it's a pencil, is it a... Exactly, you know.
And the idea, literally, it sounds so hysterical now, the idea was...
I figured if I could emulate all those answers, you know, then the magic would happen and it would work for me.
I remember my mother likes to tell the story.
I always was meant to be a writer when I was five, four.
I said, what are you doing?
I'm writing a book.
Well, I was copying the Iliad, you know.
Perfect.
It doesn't get any better than that.
You were.
That's how you write a book.
All right.
But I picked a good book.
You picked the right one.
It's a good metaphor for how the process happens, too, you know.
That's all there is to it.
That's all there is.
I have notebooks still, you know, crammed in desk drawers at home dating back to when I was seven, eight years old, you know.
And really pretty pristine memories of sitting at my, you know, grandmother's dining room table getting away from everybody, you know, trying to find the quiet corner somewhere in the house and just making stories.
Sure.
Well, now let's jump ahead.
Now, you entered a contest, right?
This is how you... I won a contest.
I didn't even know there was a contest, and I didn't know I was entered.
I'm a little vague on the history on this.
Yeah, what happened was I was writing... After I got out of college, I was writing a lot of short fiction, you know, and just sending it out, getting it back, just mechanical, a ton of rejections, just continual, you know.
What kinds of pieces?
Oh, bad Raymond Carver invitations, mainly.
So, basically, you were trying to do detective things, mystery things.
Not at all.
No, I was doing, you know, Raymond Carver.
Raymond Carver, yeah.
Oh, you're thinking Chandler.
I was, no, I didn't read mysteries.
I didn't read crime fiction.
Yeah, I was basically... Yeah, I was basically doing...
imitations of what was in the air at the time in the mid-80s, you know, which was basically the, you know, minimalist slash new realist, you know, all those, you know, Tobias Wolfe, Elizabeth Talent, all those short story writers at the time.
And getting a lot, sending them all out to the quarterlies, getting them all back, you know.
But by that time... Have you looked at any of them since?
Oh, yeah.
They're dreadful.
You were serving your apprentice.
Right.
No one will ever see them.
They're dead and buried.
They're where they belong.
Right, absolutely.
All the critical judgments that were made on those stories were correct.
Okay, go ahead.
So we turned to where you were.
Well, two things happened at the same time.
One was that the stories were bloating.
You know, they were just getting longer and longer.
And there was a guy, there's a poet named Robert Cording, who teaches English up at Holy Cross.
and I had gotten to know him fairly well as a student.
And then after I graduated, we continued to sort of see each other, and he'd look at my work continually.
He was a real mentor, you know.
He sort of, if anyone taught me how to write, he did, absolutely.
Now you're married, are you working here?
Yeah, yeah.
So did you basically come right into the business?
Yeah, what happened was, I went through four years of college, pretty much diluted that, you know,
the way I'll become a writer is, you know, the summer after I graduate, I'll write that first novel, it'll be published, and there's the career, you know?
And of course, the summer came along, I didn't write the novel, and, you know, I need a job, you know?
Just as well, you didn't write the novel straight away.
Exactly.
So I looked for some teaching jobs, and things just sort of fell into place.
I ended up coming in here, and I got married right after that, and that was when I kind of got
serious about it you know I had a full-time job and I said I gotta make some sacrifices or I'm gonna not be writing for the first time in my life so that's when I started the habit of getting up at 5 4 35 o'clock in the morning knocking off a few hours of writing before coming into work so it was really schizophrenic at the beginning you know it was did you ever have any doubt that you wouldn't I mean every day yeah I continue I you know I say I had doubt what I had was um
I had no indication that I'd ever break through.
But I did know that whether I ever broke through or not, I'd always be doing this.
Because not to do what I was... Yeah, it was... Not to do what?
I wasn't a pleasant person to be around.
You know, I mean, my wife can always tell if I've slipped and missed the morning or something.
As a matter of fact, kind of an apocryphal story, what happened was, when we got married in 82...
And we moved into a little cottage, and we were sort of renovating it, you know.
In Worcester?
Yeah, right around the corner.
Same place we continue to live now.
No, no, too terrifying.
And there was a little room above the garage that we had sort of said in passing, that'll be a study, you know, when we get it together.
But for about six months, you know, I was just recently married.
I was only a year into, you know, this job.
And we were working on the house, and we didn't get the room together.
And it was the first time since I was literally seven or eight years old that I wasn't continually writing, you know, every day.
And I was getting more and more just disgruntled and, you know, a lot of anxiety, a lot of depression.
And finally one morning, I'm sound asleep in bed, you know, it's like February.
It's a morning like this, freezing cold.
The alarm goes off.
It's pitch dark at 5 a.m.
You know, I sit bolt upright.
I said, what's going on?
My wife says.
Get up.
Go to the room.
Pushes me out of bed.
And I go down, and what she had done was she had, you know, whitewashed all the walls in this room, put all the bookcases in, put all my books in it.
We had a desk in there.
She pulled the drop cloth off, set up the typewriter.
And that morning I sat there, you know, for two hours, and I might have written a sentence or two, you know.
People don't.
I appreciate it.
It's not a tap you can just turn on.
No way.
And this stuff comes... But from that day, from that day, that was the routine that started.
This is about when?
That began in 1982.
And then what ended up happening was, so I was writing these short stories every morning, and what ended up happening was, as I say, it was twofold.
One thing that happened was the stories were getting longer and longer and longer, and I didn't have, you know, I'm the worst...
inner critic.
I just have no capacity for judging my own work at all, none.
I desperately need outside readers.
So one thing that happened was Bob Cording, my mentor, his name is C-O-R-D-I-N-G, and he's published three volumes of poetry, and he literally had to say to me one day, you know, and I handed him a
short story that was 160 pages long he had to say you know maybe you're not writing short stories anymore maybe you're starting to write novels you know and it was literally like an epiphany it was well maybe maybe i'm finally doing it you know so um the second thing that happened at about that exact same time was that a story a very small story that i had sent out to um
New England Review, Red Love Quarterly, which at the time was being edited by Sidney Lee.
They accepted it.
That classic day, the envelope came back in the mail.
Instead of having the story, it had an acceptance.
And that was in 86.
In the summer of 86, the story came out.
What was the name of it?
It was called Nevada.
I was about to say Nebraska.
I got my states wrong.
Think of the Springsteen album.
No, it was called Nevada.
And, you know, the story comes out.
It's in the quarterly.
You read it.
It's nice, and you forget about it, you know.
Except that about a month later, I got a letter in the mail from an agent in New York City, and he said, you know, I read this story you wrote, and he said, have you written a novel I might read?
And so immediately I ran to the typewriter and just lied my ass off, you know, I just, yeah, I'm just finishing up, you know, finishing up my first novel and I expect to have it to you in about three months.
And classic first novel story, you know, I just threw everything, you know, I threw 26 years worth of, you know, experience and reading and stuff into it, you know, everything but the kitchen sink and then the kitchen sink, you know, and
And the three months, and I literally figured, you know, I'm constantly self-deluded.
I literally figured I would take three months, and I just, you know, I would do nothing but, you know, eat, sleep, and write.
That was exciting.
Do you know who the agent was?
Yeah, he's my agent today.
It's Nat Sobel.
S-O-B-E-L.
He's, who are some of his, James Elroy.
Oh, really?
He represents Elroy, James Hall.
Back from Florida, yeah.
Andrew Greeley, he represents... I think Thorne's getting a little old for me.
Time to start something new.
The last adventure was a little crazy.
But that's just... Yeah, you get bogged down.
The first couple were really outstanding.
Travelable Freeze.
And Elroy's had quite a run, too.
This year, especially.
He's still trying to figure out where the hell he's going, I think.
And...
He's an interesting guy.
I remember.
I think I'm sure I clipped that article.
It's in my files.
He's always working on the mother's story.
Yeah, he's doing the autobiography, so to speak.
The investigation, so to speak.
But go ahead.
So, Sobel.
Yeah, so Nat sent me a letter, and I literally believed, you know, I had an idea for a novel, for a first novel, and I literally believed that I could write it in three or four months.
and then get it back in the mail to him.
And of course, you know, like every first novel, it's the three months turned into, literally, it turned into three years.
No kidding.
Yeah, and I figured it'd be like a 200-pager, you know, first novel off the desk, and it turned into a 600-page novel.
And I had to, it was embarrassing, because I had to...
write back to him three years later and say, remember me, you sent me this solicitation and enclosed a photocopy of his original letter and say at the end of it, you know, would you be interested?
You didn't consider maintaining contact with him?
Were you embarrassed?
Yeah, I was, you know, I had fibbed to begin with, you know, I was afraid of coming clean.
And, you know, he was great.
He was just so encouraging.
You know, he wrote back,
And he was always encouraging and honest at the same time.
You know, he never let me believe, you know.
Do you remember what year this was about?
This was, by the time it was done, I started the book January 1 of 86.
And I didn't finish it.
26 years old.
Yeah, 26 years old.
And I didn't finish it until the very end of 88.
And in the meantime...
You know, everything, my whole life had sort of, they'd been huge upheaval.
My father passed away suddenly, and there was a lot of changes.
And, as a matter of fact, I had to, what happened with the book was I had to suspend work on it after my father's death for a little bit, and then plunge back into it and try to pick up all the pieces.
And it was a really different book, you know.
When I wrote back to Matt and said, would you read it, he wrote back, he said, 600 pages, send me the first 50.
Which, you know, pretty standard, and I did.
And he wrote back and he said, all right, send me the other 550.
But he said, this is the least commercial book I've ever attempted to represent.
It had no commercial sales potential at all.
There was no way to sit down across the desk from an editor and say,
This is a genre work, boom, boom.
This is your, you know, market audience, boom, boom, boom.
It was a... To this day, it's hard to describe it.
You know what it was?
It was my attempt, my inept attempt to try to write, you know, a big modernist Joyce-ian novel, you know, and it was just, it was nuts.
It was...
It was set, it was in the prototype version of Quinsigamond, you know, it was my extrapolated version of Worcester, and it took place in a week.
It took place during Holy Week of Easter, and each chapter was a day, you know, it was the seven days of the week.
And what I would do was, the whole book, you know, it just had this ridiculous, Joyce-ian kind of structure to it, where what I would do would be, I would take every
you know, referent of the number seven that I could find, you know, the seven deadly sins and the seven primary colors and the seven wonders of the world, and they each had a specific place in the novel they had to repeat, you know.
And what it was about, basically the plot line was, it was about this transmogrified version of Holy Cross, you know, that's on this hill, and it's about a senile, possibly insane, alcoholic,
elderly Jesuit who at midnight every day of Holy Week, uh, leaves the hill in a Rolls Royce that's chauffeur driven by an 18 year old local, you know, blue collar kid.
And they drive down the hill and visit all these different places until dawn, you know, the following morning.
And in the course of the night, you know, they go to different places.
They always end up every, every, every, at the end of every, um,
night as dawn comes they always end up at a different diner in the city which was the most fun part about writing writing the book was like i picked seven different diners and then i'd spend months you know just drinking gallons of coffee and sketching the diner and stuff and uh yeah that's the boulevard my wife took that picture yeah so uh yeah she did a good job on that yeah i actually loved the time myself very nice and
Oh, she'll be pleased to hear so.
I thought you bought it, actually.
It's nice.
Well, they won't market it out there.
Yeah, it's got the grid, you know?
It's got the icicles hanging in there, the slant of the post.
The lines are good.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
By the way, how many kids do you have?
How many kids do I have?
I have two.
My three-year-old is Claire, and I have a seven-month-old, James.
So are you...
Writing the business, though, since your brother died?
Yeah.
Well, my wife and I both, we jointly are.
She came in after my father passed away.
She was a school psychologist, and she left that and came in here, and we'd been here ever since.
That was almost nine years ago.
I hope not.
Oh, it's still turning.
Oh, it's the heat.
It's the steam behind you.
But anyway, I'm digressing way too much here.
You can pick and choose it.
But I said, so when Matt read the novel, you know, and he said, he wrote me back, he read the whole thing, and he said, he wrote me back a really nice letter that I've kept, but he said, I have no idea, you know, if I can sell this, which, oh yeah, which I subsequently found out was kind of amazing, because, you know, he's only making money on whatever he sells, and his time is, in that profession, his time is absolutely money.
Exactly, exactly.
And he, you know, for two years, he flogged that thing.
He just, he went out, we went to... That's pretty decent.
Oh, God.
That's why, you know, I'm just so indebted to this guy.
But we, in the end, by the end, I think we'd gone to something like 20 different houses with it.
And we came... At three or four different houses, we came, you know, very close to actually getting a sale at... Where does Jonathan Galeshi...
Is Faresdrasch Kuro?
Yeah, Faresdrasch.
Gillespie, Gillespie.
Gillespie, I can never remember.
We came close there.
He loved the book, but he just felt, you know, he can't, he's not going to sell five copies of this thing, you know.
I think publishing the first book is the hardest thing in the world.
You know, it's absolutely unknown commodity.
I recommend it to no one.
Right, yeah.
It's the most wonderful thing in the world.
When it happens, God.
Yeah, yeah.
So the agent just flogged the thing.
You know, it was funny.
It was a funny experience, and it was a good experience to go through because I went through all his emotions that I always assume, and I know from talking to other writers, you know, first novelists go through, which was he'd send
He'd forward an editorial letter from, say, Random House, you know.
I'd just hold on to it.
You know, I'd be like, look at the great things.
You know, I'd say, oh, we love the prose and we love the characters.
And then you'd hit the last paragraph and it would go.
But it doesn't fit our list.
Yeah, there's no way, you know, we're going to make any money on this book.
And, you know, I'd be showing these to my wife going, look at what.
First novels never make any money anyway.
Yeah.
You know, the whole idea is grab them now for the future.
We hope three books down the line.
So obviously you had to make a fundamental decision here to switch gears and to try something a little more commercial.
Yes and no.
What ended up happening was, at first I thought that's exactly what the mistake was.
The mistake was that it wasn't commercial enough, so therefore if I just blatantly went the commercial route, I'd have no problem.
So I wrote back to Matt and I said, give me three months and I'll have in your hands a saleable novel.
So I sat down.
Three months again.
Three months.
I must be hung up on three months somehow.
But this was one of the most important lessons I learned in the past 15 years or so.
I literally, in three months, I ripped something off.
You know, I just, boom.
I wrote a sleek, filed-down, 250-page crime thriller.
250 manuscript pages?
250 manuscript pages.
So what's that from 140, 150 pages?
Probably.
Something that's tight.
Yeah.
That was what I wanted, yeah, really tight.
And my idea was, you know, this is exactly what they're looking for, you know.
It has sex, it has violence, it's stripped down, you know, the reader can just, you know.
And I sent it to the agent, almost cocky that this would, you know, click.
And in three weeks, boom, it's back in my door with a really terse note from him saying, don't send me anything like this ever again.
And I just, I'd made a fatal mistake, which was, you know,
I just, there was no interior vision in that book at all.
You can't fool his people.
Yeah.
My idea, you know, it was like writing with my eyes closed.
It was, you know, it was really horrid, basically.
I was like... Well, my buddy, you know, remember Everett Skane used to write... Yeah, I read his first, I think it's first.
Bullet for Georgie.
Bullet for Georgie, that's the one, yeah.
He went up to Maine and he tried to do some stuff.
I remember my editor, you know, and...
He's batting this shit out.
Doesn't he realize that he's not fooling anybody?
And this is a published author.
You can't.
You have to care about it.
These are professional people, and they can see exactly what it is.
You know, it sounds.
absolutely sounds so cliched but as soon as the passion isn't there you know as soon as you just it isn't coming from in here so he was he was a little angry yeah yeah he felt after that first book which was my time with this he felt the first book was so obsessional yeah and that that was the value to it you know that that that like everything interior is coming out on the page and and that is what's eventually going to sell you and that i had just completely you know negated that in the second book
So here I am now at this point.
I'm 29 now.
What I'm figuring is I sacrificed the only agent who ever had an interest in me.
And what ended up happening, and at that point I was really starting to doubt things because at that point I didn't have any ideas for a third book, too.
And the prospects were zero.
I was just creatively barren, you know.
and brooding about it a lot.
Things in the works, at least the hope wasn't there.
You didn't have a book making the rounds at some point.
No, nothing.
There was nothing.
The first book was a trunk novel.
It was dead.
The second book... If something's making the rounds, at least, it's hope.
The call could come tomorrow, as unlikely as that might be.
You want to take a break, and I'll get you coffee?
I'd love a coffee.
Great.
You said black, right?
oh god you're not gonna have any coffee i had a couple already and i keep to the quota but uh what ended up happening was so here it was this was summer of 89 i guess july of 89 and i got two dead novels i've angered my agent and i've got no ideas for anything new you know it's starting to seem like is he encouraging you to do anything else he didn't you know
In the letter that returned the second book, it was about three sentences long, and there was no P.S., send me the next book, which was, you know, I was saying, boy, this guy's clearly spent a lot of time on my behalf with no return.
So what ended up happening was, and I've told this story, you know, a few times before because it's just characteristic of how every book since then has come to me.
We went out to dinner for my wife's birthday at the, I guess it's closed now, the Victorian down in Whitensville.
Out of business now, somebody told me recently.
Very, very nice.
Yeah, it was a great place.
I reviewed restaurants years ago.
Oh, it was a nice job.
Good work if you can get it.
Well, I got food poisoning a couple of times.
Oh, no, you're kidding me.
I got so bored with it.
Oh, my God.
Really?
You never think of it like that.
Just feeling that you have to go out.
to dinner, and you have to be so critical of every damn thing that comes across.
Actually, when you say that, it took the pleasure out of it.
I think to myself, you can never really kick back and say, well, let's enjoy the night.
But anyway, so it took the joy out of going out to dinner.
Jeez, that's a shame.
Not really.
It's back.
It didn't stay away.
No.
Well, so we were at the Victorian, and we had, you know,
Here I am for weeks on end brooding about what am I going to do for a new book, and am I going to be able to... Oh, good.
I'm glad.
Am I going to be able to mend fences with my agent and everything?
And so what ended up happening was I had a really nice meal, and for a minute I sort of forgot about the whole writing problem.
And we finished our meal, and we were driving up 1.46.
It was probably about midnight, and there were no other cars on the road.
until finally, somewhere between Whitensville and Lister, you know, two big lights come up behind me and then swing out and pass me, and it's a huge U.S.
Postal Service van, you know, U.S.
Postal on the side with the eagle.
And as it passes, my wife makes the remark, she says, did I ever tell you what happened to me one night when I was sorting mail during college?
When she was at Holy Cross, to earn money, she worked as a night sorter at the Lowell Post Office.
So...
I said, I don't remember a story like that.
So she proceeds to tell me how one night, you know, she's sitting there at 2 in the morning or something, and she's in front of, you know, they call them cages, the big green metal slotted stations, and a box about the size of this donut box comes across her cage, you know, and it's wrapped in brown paper, and there's no return address, and she knows there's something wrong with it right away because...
You know, there's seepage coming from, it's all wet in the bottom, and there's a foul smell coming from the thing.
So what do you do?
You tell the supervisor.
So she goes, gets the supervisor, comes back, he says, I think we have to open this one.
There's something wrong here.
And they have the right to do that.
Yeah, if there's suspicion about, you know, a package, they can check into it.
So they get the X-Acto knife, they cut it open, fold back the tissue paper, and there's a dead bat inside the package.
So she's telling me this on 146 as I'm driving, and as I hear, inside the package is a dead bat.
I just want to pull to the side of the road, you know, get out the notebook, because, you know, the antenna just went off immediately, you know, dead bat.
It was just, I knew there was something.
As soon as I heard that, I said, there's a story, you know, there's a capital S story there.
And I literally, I got up the next morning, and I started writing a scene
about a sorter in a post office, kind of a dreary post office at 2 o'clock in the morning, finding something horrific in a brown paper shoebox.
And I didn't know who the sorter was.
What was in the package?
I didn't know.
Can I just interrupt?
Did your wife ever get the end of the story?
Who was it sent?
Who was it addressed to?
They had who it was addressed to, but there was no return address, and she never followed up on it to find out what the... But that was... The writer and me were really one of those... What you just asked is immediately the questions that ticked off in my head that says there's a novelty because, you know... Why?
Who sent somebody a dead bat?
What had the person done to deserve getting a dead bat?
You know, where do you get a dead bat if you need a dead bat?
And, you know, I was telling that story one time at a sales convention of some book distributors down in Connecticut.
And I was telling it at a luncheon.
And we had finished eating and we were having coffee.
And I'm telling, you know, they found a dead bat.
So I say, just like, just what went off in your head, I say, you know.
And I thought to myself, you know, who do you send a dead bat to?
And without, like, missing a beat, this woman opposite me, you know, who had been very severe all day, you know, lost in thought, she just says, ex-husband.
Immediately, boom.
Hadn't occurred to me, but that sounds legitimate, you know, immediately.
And it doesn't need a return.
No, of course not.
There's going to be some subtext there that's going to be resonant.
Absolutely.
It's not going to know who sent it, but it is going to know who sent it.
It's going to recognize the handwriting.
Absolutely.
All kinds of possibilities, you know.
So for the first time from that incident, I started writing a book without...
any outline, without any idea of the story in line.
And it came together so quickly.
It just snowballed.
It was literally like just... I don't outline anything.
You don't outline at all.
I'm always interested in everyone's process.
I think 638-page books exist without an outline.
That's beautiful.
Believe it or not.
I plague other writers by asking that question.
And I get, like you do, I get every answer, I'm sure.
across the spectrum.
I was... Get it out.
I've never outlined a column.
No.
It's a thousand words, though, and it's very complex.
I like to think it's a complex thing with a beginning and one and an end.
You want it structured, yeah, absolutely.
I structured it, but I know where I'm going to begin and I know I'm going to end, and whatever else happens in between happens.
You know, it's like a jazz piece.
I start and I... It sounds... I was on a... A couple years ago, I was on a bus tour.
It was one of the most fun things I've ever done, promotionally.
Oh, it was wonderful, because it was... Well, let's finish about the bat story.
I'm finished on the bat story.
So the book just sort of, you know, it just coalesced.
It wrote itself.
I had it done in about, I think it was about eight months.
And it ended up being a very different book than what I thought it was going to be at the beginning.
And when it was done...
I didn't know what kind of an animal I had on my hands.
It had all the weirdness and all the obsessional stuff from the first 600-page book, but it also had genre devices that I'd been hoping to make things a little bit more commercial.
So my wife read it, and I said, what do you think?
She says, I think this one has a real shot.
And I said, well, let's call the agent again and see what he says.
Were you writing on a word processor at this time?
Yeah, I was writing.
So you were polishing and revising?
Yeah, oh yeah.
I'm, you know, I just, endless.
I'm obsessional about it.
Yeah, I can't let it go, you know.
I wake up in the night with words.
Right.
That have escaped me for a week.
That would drive me crazy.
Get the notebook.
Yeah, no, I can wake up with it.
And I will rush down immediately to put the word in where it
it has to be yeah it's it's a plague in a sense because uh it's wonderful it's almost it's a delicious pain yeah exactly you can well you can't you can't imagine not doing it in my sense is that as as you know aggravating it is in the sense that there's never a never real closure to it when i had my incident with random house i'll never forget that the next day i went to see somebody you know it was a fire on the knees like oh my god it was devastating i mean it was
Of course, absolutely, of course.
You can contract a book in the works to just be cancelled with no reason given.
And his wife says, well, would you do it again?
I said, Laura, what else do I know how to do it?
I mean, she's like, there's nothing else I can do.
But you tell me, of course I'd do it again.
You're good for the law I call.
Jesus, give me a break when I do it again.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
So you sent this off to Sobel.
I sent it off to Sobel.
He gave it a read, and he came back to me and said, I like it.
He suggested a few changes.
He's really interactive with his authors.
Did you query him, or did you just send it?
I queried him first.
I wrote a letter and said, give me a third strike.
Will you look at a third book?
Did you apologize for the previous?
Yeah, I said, I agree with your assessment of the last book.
It's a dead issue.
And will you look at a third one?
And he said he would.
You sound like one hell of a nice guy.
He's just wonderful.
He called me, as a matter of fact, he called me not last night, but the night before.
I mean, I'll tell you my agents.
I love my agents.
I would, you know, they stuck with me through, and they made nothing on me, you know.
Yeah, they could do okay now, but go ahead.
I'm sorry.
No, no problem.
I'm always interested to hear how it works all over the playing field, believe me.
They stuck with me.
God bless them.
You know, you really need that, too.
You just, you know.
Well, you need them to read it to say, uh,
I don't need this on tape.
I'll be so furious when I hit myself.
Well, he... Nat wrote back, and he suggested a few changes, and they were good.
They were all great ideas, and I moved the book around the way that he wanted and polished it up and polished it up again and sent it back to him, and... Did you have the title at this point?
At this point, I was already calling it Box 9, yeah.
And he... There was a flurry of activity at the beginning.
This was...
It must have been summer of 90.
And over the course of that summer, there were different editors at different houses that were going back and forth on it.
And I was waiting to hear what was going to happen.
And then sort of all activities ceased, and I didn't hear, as Labor Day in the fall came on, I didn't hear anything at all.
And then what ended up happening was, and I began to think again, well, that was the, you know, we shot the load, that's it.
It's not going to go.
And in December, about a week before Christmas, December of 90, I had had, Nancy and I were here in the office, this was before either of the kids came along, and we had had, you know, classic day from hell.
You know, everything was a problem, from turning the key in the morning to lock up at night.
You know, every phone call, an argument, lost keys, you know, customers bounce checks, everything.
Horrible.
And we worked late, and it got to be about 7 o'clock at night.
We said, let's get the hell out of here.
And she said to me, I'll never forget, she said, you know, it's been such a lousy day anyway.
Why don't we just go and get that last Christmas gift we need at the Greendale Mall, you know, and we'll just shoot the day completely.
I said, fine.
I said, but we've got to let the dog out before we take off.
So we ran into the house.
We didn't even take our coats off.
And I went to leave the dog out, and I noticed in the dark I hadn't let a light on, and the red light on the answering machine was flashing.
And I hit it.
There's the voice saying, Nat Sobel in New York, give me a call when you get in.
And, you know, I froze.
And my wife said, if you don't call him, I will, you know.
Oh, yeah.
Dialed the number.
It's one of the great feelings.
And he came on the line.
Oh, man, I'm telling you, it's the same type of heart and throat.
Oh, yeah.
Especially, you know, like yourself or myself, if you've been doing this since childhood, and you've just been envisioning, you've just been replaying it, you know, over and over, the day that happens, you know.
His voice came on the line.
And every connection we had had prior to this, except for one phone call, had been correspondence.
So he came on the line, and I said, Nat, this is Jack O'Connell calling from Worcester.
I hope I didn't call it a bad time.
What time was it about?
It had to be, by that time, it had to be about 8 o'clock at night.
And he said, he says, no, you didn't call it a bad time, Jack.
And then he leaves the dramatic pause, you know.
And then he comes back, velvet voice, he just comes back.
Congratulations, you're a published novelist.
And I just, and you know, she probably would not want me to tell you this, but behind me, my wife, the tears started running, you know?
I have it for you.
I mean, I saw my book twice, you know.
The first time was a generation.
I know you did.
And the second time was tears.
Absolutely, yeah.
Finally.
I mean, when now he calls me the day before Thanksgiving, and it's a tradition now, he calls me every day the day.
When that starts, tell me.
Will it click on?
It should, but it'll stop turning.
Okay.
And it should make you make a sound.
I mean, I have an internal clock here.
Okay.
And he said, I want you to have a good Thanksgiving tomorrow.
We're going to buy your book.
He said, it's going to take some time.
He said, I've got a lot of people to persuade.
They had to persuade them.
This book had a life, had a commercial.
He's the hero.
Absolutely.
Look at what he's done.
My book is the second best-selling book at home in 1995 after Sue Grafton.
I only got beat by Sue Grafton.
That's unbelievable.
You know, please, she's in another league.
Really?
That is incredible.
My book is 50,000, you know, but there were assholes there that didn't want it, you know.
To this day, they eat crow.
That's why you just need that one champion who's just going to push it through.
This is a book that has to be done.
That must have been a nice Thanksgiving.
But don't get discovered.
It's going to take a while.
It went from Thanksgiving to March.
November, December, January, February, March, before we finally had a contract.
Wow.
I mean, I suffered.
I went 13 months with a book out there.
Now, do you think you're going to stay with them?
Oh, I love them.
When I get home, I'm working on a proposal.
What are the machines?
I don't want to... I go crazy when I'm transcribing this stuff.
I hear myself yakking away.
I swear at myself.
Oh, God.
Go ahead.
So tell me, Sobel, congratulations.
So you're a published novelist, and we never got to get the Christmas present.
We went out to our Toros, had a bottle of wine.
It was just...
Night of a Lifetime.
You know, it's one of those little liberty.
So he had entered in a, now you won a contest, as I understand.
Yeah, and I had no idea about this at all.
Unbeknownst to me, there was a, well, what ended up happening was, he called me back a week or two later, and he said, he says, kid, it's either feast or famine.
Now I'm calling to tell you I've got two offers on the book.
We're going back and forth between two houses.
And the other house was Random House.
So did he run a little auction?
It wasn't exactly an auction.
What he did was he presented the two offers to me, and they were both very close.
They were within $5,000.
So he did multiple submissions then?
I assume it must have been.
So he liked it enough to do that.
Yeah.
The other editor was an editor from Random House called, named Susan Camel, who was Joni Evans' protege, I guess.
That was when they were starting up that Turtle Bay.
Well, I could scan the same day Joni did.
Joni signed the contract in my book.
I mean, I was part of the Joni Evans purge.
I mean, it was nothing personal.
I mean, my husband had gone to another house, and I was inherited by Joe Fox.
And meanwhile, they were cutting the list back 20%, and they were just slicing 20%, you know, and I was kicked out because they had no money tied up in me.
You know, 15 grand, that's all I had.
That's shit.
That's nothing.
You write that up.
Sure.
I mean, I kept the advance.
I got two advances for the book, but so what?
Go ahead.
So you have Random and you have Mysterious.
Yeah, and he was like, where do you want to go?
And I said, I know nothing.
I'm a neophyte.
I have no idea.
You tell me where I should go.
And he said, well, the only thing I will tell you is that, he said, I didn't tell you about this earlier, but I also, Mysterious is having a first novel contest, and your book would be eligible to be part of that.
And he said, you know, in the event you won, he said, I'm not saying that you're going to win, but he said, in the event that you won, the advance would be a good deal more.
And he said, and the promotion would be, they'd spend a lot more on advertising, too.
And I said, well, you know, given that, then let's go with them.
Was Otto Penzler running this at the time?
He had just sold to Warner at the time.
He had just, but Otto, I got a chance to meet Otto.
He was still- He was a book collector, as I am.
Oh, amazing.
He's an amazing guy.
He's somebody I should have almost even had in this book.
Next book, go down and just see his inner sanctum.
I think there are 25,000 rare first editions.
I was in the room.
He's famous.
I know all about it.
He had already sold at that point.
I'm almost sure he had already made the sale to Warner, but they kept him on staff as a consultant for a couple years before he could start his own, exactly.
But what happened was, about three or four months after that, after I decided to go with Mysterious, Nat called me one night, same type of call, and said, you won that damn contest, Al.
How much money was it?
It was 50 grand.
Yeah.
So that was sweet.
It was really sweet, yeah.
That's nice.
Oh, man, I was just floored.
You know, I was dumbstruck.
I was, you know.
I bet the advance for the book wasn't more than $15,000 or $20,000.
That's exactly what it was.
It was $15,000.
And that knocked it up.
Winning the award knocked it up, too.
And included with it was it became an alternate selection for Book of the Month, too, which, as you know, is nice also, you know.
They get that flyer, you know.
And so that was, when that happened, that was just great because
It sort of, before the book hit the stands, it sort of cooked up some free word on it.
You know, there was on the front page of the Life section of USA Today, there was a little blurb on the contest.
And that's when the Boston Globe came down.
And Davis, I think the guy was.
Bill Davis, that was his name from the Globe.
Feature writer.
And so what ended up happening was the...
The book, prior to the book coming out, after I won the award, they had me down to New York.
And, you know, that was my first publishing trip, you know.
It was, you know, I'd been to New York.
I'd been to New York maybe three times in my life prior to that, you know.
So now they're putting you up in a nice hotel.
Oh, unbelievable.
And what happened, and it happened so storybooked, you know.
Things seldom happen in the course of a lifetime this way, but it was so, you know,
So classic for the first novelist.
I showed up.
At that time, they were moving.
They were in the process of moving to the Time Life Building on Avenue of the Americas, but they were still housed at that point in above Otto's store.
I think his store is on West 57, which is a four-story brownstone.
And I went in, and we went up to the offices.
My wife and I went up to the offices.
And we met my editor, Sarah Ann Freed.
And she said, I'll take you in to meet Otto.
So they took me into that room.
And, you know, for a guy who just, you know, cherishes.
I was 30 years old.
And I just, you know, I can't call myself a collector.
You know what a real collector is, you know.
But I've been, I've cherished books forever, you know.
And I've collected the authors who meant a lot to me.
You know, I have a pretty big,
substantial Kerouac collection.
I got a good Pinchon collection, you know, first editions.
Really?
And they're worth some money.
Yeah, the Pinchons have done well lately.
You got dust jackets?
I got, oh, they're pristine, you know.
I got Gravity's Rainbow first, Crying A Lot 49.
I don't have a first of V, unfortunately, but one of these days.
My editor has that in proofs.
He showed it to me.
Oh, my God.
Yeah, well, Ray Roberts is Pinchon's editor.
That's right.
They're right next door.
He moved to Hoth.
That's... Oh, my... So do you... I mean, Alan is... You got to tell me, Nick.
Do you have any inside word?
Do they tell you any stories?
Do they... Or do they not know much themselves?
Do they... No, they know nothing.
Ray Roberts knows, but... But he doesn't tell... I'm going down in a couple weeks.
I'll try and get some shit.
If you ever hear anything, tell me.
I'll ask him.
He'll tell me anything.
But, I mean, I haven't really asked him.
Because in the new book...
I don't know if you got a chance to read it or not, but in the Skin Palace, the central mystery character, this guy Terence Propp, TP, is totally, his whole life is torn from Pinchon.
I gave Pinchon's biography to Terence Propp.
But I went into Otto's inner sanctum, the den there, and all the heavy oak woodwork all the way around, just surrounding it.
It's a womb of books, you know?
And I was just, my mouth was hanging up and just looking at them.
It's thrilling.
If you love books, something like that, just your skin buzzes.
My heart was beating.
And then on top of that, as I'm sitting there and we're pointing out different editions to me, a secretary pokes her head in the door and she says, Otto, Steve and Tabitha King are outside.
Do you have five seconds just to talk to them?
And he says, oh yeah, I'll be right out.
So he walks out and my editor says,
Would you like to meet Stephen King?
You know, kid from Worcester, you know.
He was a prince to me.
And you know what he did?
We walked outside.
He's a little guy, too, right?
He's not a big guy.
He's huge.
He's 6'5".
His wife is very small, but he's enormous.
And he was standing talking to Otto, and we came out.
Otto introduced me and said, Jack just won our contest for the first novelist, best first novel.
And he says to me, that's great, what's it about?
And you can imagine, I went, you know, nothing came out.
My wife was standing embarrassed for me, you know, I can't, I said, I'm stuttering.
And Stephen King, he bursts out laughing, and he just, he steps over next to me, he goes, listen, Jack,
You're going to get asked this question a lot.
He says, if this happens to you, just say, it's about 250 pages, and walk away.
That's a standard answer.
That's what Richard Ford says.
There are people who receive signing, and some guy comes up and says,
He gave him some shit.
He said, clearly you're not going to buy a book.
He said, what's this book go buy anyway?
He said, it's about 437 pages.
And you'll find out.
It's about $22.95.
Take out the card.
But you know, he stepped aside.
It was such a momentous day for me in that, you know, it took on a whole unreal quality.
Surreal.
Very surreal.
I'm this kid from Worcester, never got out of Worcester, never, you know, very unworldly to some extent.
And
I'm standing in a publisher's office in Manhattan, having dreamed my whole life about this moment, and here's Stephen King, and he walked across the room to me and stood there talking about, you know... Did he write you a blurb?
He didn't give me a blurb.
I didn't ask for one, you know.
But Elroy... That's another thing you've got to learn, is don't be shy.
Ask for it wherever you can.
I was interviewing Pat Conroy, and I know Pat now.
We're friends.
This is the fourth time I've been with Pat.
God, he's...
going back to the Great Santini.
He's great.
We're the same age.
He's just great.
And I've caused him to miss four interviews.
So we're here in New York in June.
You must know everyone.
Yeah, pretty much.
So Packham's, he gives me a big hug.
He says, I'm so proud of you for your book.
I says, yeah, you're proud.
I says, you never wrote me a goddamn book.
I never got it.
He says, because he had moved in 2017.
He said, well, shit, what do we need?
He took my pad like this.
Oh, my God.
And he wrote out a thing like this, and then he says, change it to anything you want, signed to Pat Conroy, and I brought it up down to Holton.
That's the blurb in the Book of the Month Club.
That is tremendous.
He said, well, come on, let's do it right now.
I have it.
You should frame it.
I have it on my thing.
I just love it, you know.
That's a classic story.
He said, well, let's do it right now.
Anyway, so let's... I know.
I am just digressing.
I encourage it, because I like a nice... Well, you can pick and choose whatever you want to use, but... So, all right.
So the book came out when... Give me the update again of that.
The first book, Box 9, came out January of 92.
And how did it do?
It did well.
The numbers?
I have no idea.
What was the first printing?
Do you remember?
I think the first printing was 10,000 copies, though.
I have also...
It's been suggested to me that maybe it was 5,000 copies.
And so I have no idea.
Jim Crumley said to me one time, you know, don't even listen to their numbers when you tell you.
It's just not going to be the case.
But it came out in a paperback edition.
It went into a second printing in the paperback edition.
And we had for a time, for about two years running, we had a film option on the damn thing.
So every six months, they picked up on it, which was, that was gravy, you know.
It wasn't, but it was, the nice part about it was, it was totally unexpected, and it was, and I'm such a movie freak, but even the possibility, you know, of that happening, you know, is just, it was sweet, you know, it was really.
You know, they eventually, it changed hands, well, it didn't change hands, but it got, you know, bigger companies,
Bigger production companies kept eating the smaller fish, and it eventually got dropped.
So let's go ahead to the next book now.
Now, had you decided that everything was going to, that you were going to create a community, a town?
I mean, this is your... It happened pretty organically, you know.
I think it was... The Boston writers, the LA writers, the Chicago writers, the Worcester writers, I guess.
I never sat down and said, you know, I was going to be this crime regionalist, you know.
What happened was more that...
I had a really specific set of locales in my brain, which, to my understanding, and I know people disagree with it, were, you know, the basis of them, the seed of them, came certainly out of Worcester.
But I feel that I warp them and magnify them and elongate them so much that they, you know, they're really more some...
No man's land, and they are.
Yeah, but it absolutely, well, basically do my working process, and you can extrapolate from this, my working process is I'll have a very good idea of what settings, the settings will be for each chapter, and I'll go to that, and it's a specific literal place here in the city, and I'll go.